Add cultural change (#2875)
alan-turing-institute/the-turing-way: book/website/ethical-research/activism/activism-cultural-change.md

(er-activism-cultural-change)=

# Cultural Change

(er-activism-cultural-change-what)=
## What is cultural change?

> Culture is the social environment in which you partake. 

Reviewer: I like this definition, but I might expand it even further – maybe even address how "fuzzy" it is for people to pin down (and deeply controversional for the fields that study it). Can we customise this, or attune it specifically to the "culture" of academia?

I've seen culture defined as everything from "socially transmitted behavior patterns, arts, beliefs, institutions, and all other products of human work and thought typical of a population or community at a given time" (Webster) to a "way of life, especially in terms of customs or behaviors of a particular community or group within society" (Cambridge). The way that culture is defined within institutions is a big question in and of itself!

What about something like: 
```suggestion
Culture is defined in many ways, one of which is about the social environment in which you partake, or the customs and behaviours that define a group of people.
```

Author: Great points! I love the edit! 😄

Culture has an influence on your views, values, concerns and your identity. 
Culture can be difficult to change as it is hard to address directly and shared values can be deeply ingrained ({cite:ps}`Kotter2012change`). 
Instead, norms of behaviour may be easier to change. 

> Here, cultural change is defined as “inspiring a change in behaviour in persons/organisations, with a lasting impact, strengthening the core values of persons/organisation"

Reviewer: Is there a citation that goes here?

Author: Eh.. Plomp 2022? 😄 Maybe I should remove the quotation marks?

> Here, cultural change is defined as “inspiring a change in behaviour in persons/organisations, with a lasting impact, strengthening the core values of persons/organisation"

Author: ```suggestion
Here, cultural change is defined as inspiring a change in behaviour in persons/organisations, with a lasting impact, strengthening the core values of persons/organisation.
```

> This section will continue to describe where you will encounter cultural change. 

Reviewer: I also wonder if there can be something added here that addresses the 'culture' of academic research environments or data science industry environments. Something that makes this connection between culture & academia/data science more explicit. 

Institutions, as collections of people that have shared norms, values, ideas, and even shared languages (i.e. technical jargon) can be defined as a 'culture'!

```suggestion
This section will continue to describe where you will encounter cultural change, especially in the context of academic research or industry.
```

This is followed by short summaries of works on cultural change, written by Adrienne Marie Brown, William and Susan Bridges and John P. Kotter. 

(er-activism-cultural-change-when)=
## Where/when will you encounter cultural change?

> As your social environment is continuously changing, you're likely to experience some degree of cultural change on a daily basis. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As your social environment is continuously changing, you are likely to experience some degree of cultural change on a daily basis. 
```

This might not feel like it, because the actual change that takes place will take months or even years. 

Generally, you will either be affected by cultural change, or, you want to invoke cultural change by adjusting existing practices yourself. 

> When you're affected by cultural change taking place in your environment, it may be difficult to change your practises and behaviour. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you are affected by cultural change taking place in your environment, it may be difficult to change your practises and behaviour. 
```

There should be time for reflection and evaluation to apply lessons learned to future work, and time for celebration of collective achievements. 

(er-activism-cultural-change-transitions)=
## Managing Transitions

Managing Transitions by William and Susan Bridges ({cite:ps}`Bridges2017transitions`) teaches us that a change will always be accompanied by a transition. 
A transition begins when something needs to be let go, and sits in between the old and the new situation. 
This transition phase can be insecure for people who will have to adjust to a new situation, but also an opportunity for innovation to happen if people are adequately resourced and supported (by policies, groupings, procedures). 

There are four P's in transitions ({cite:ps}`Bridges2017transitions`): 
- Purpose: people have to understand the logic behind the outcome and feel that the change is necessary.
- Picture: people need to experience how the outcome will look and feel.
- Plan: people need a step-by-step plan to know what they have to do.
- Part to play: especially if people have something to loose, they need to be able to play a part in the transition phase and eventual outcome.

> To manage transitions it needs to be clear what the problem (reason for change) is. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To manage transitionsm, it needs to be clear what the problem (reason for change) is. 
```

Author: Focus of the book is transitions, so I think we should keep the same phrasing here.

People will not change if they are not experiencing the problem and are convinced something needs to be adjusted. 
Those experiencing the problem will also have expertise and knowledge to come up with an effective solution. 

> Individuals will stand to loose something when change is happening - a sense of control over this transition helps to make the transition more comfortable. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Individuals will stand to lose something when change is happening - a sense of control over this transition helps to make the transition more comfortable. 
```

> It is important to learn what problems people are facing in a transition face, and recognise individuals that do contribute to the change. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is important to learn what problems people are facing in a transition phase, and recognise individuals that do contribute to the change. 
```

Author: Haha. Transition face. 

I can totally do English. 

I'm hiding under a blanket now.

People will need to feel safe to experiment and take risks, and not be punished when these experiments fail.

> It is important that changes are meaningfully clustered or hold off to avoid a messy change pile. 

Reviewer: I'm not sure what meaningfully clustored or hold off means? As in the change doesn't happen?

Reviewer 2: Made an edit that maybe clarifies (if I'm understanding correctly!)

Author: Did you make it in the text itself instead of as a review? I can't see anything to commit here. Maybe I just suck with GitHub 😄

> It is important that changes are meaningfully clustered or hold off to avoid a messy change pile. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is important that changes are meaningfully clustered, or held off until they can be, to avoid a messy change pile. 
```

* If changes are meaningfully clustered the changes are incorporated in the bigger change picture, and it makes sense to act on these further changes right now. 

> * In a messy change pile the changes are not neatly connected to the change that is already happening. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* In a messy change pile, the changes are not neatly connected to the change that is already happening. 
```

This can feel overwhelming as too many different changes are happening at the same time, which may pull people in different directions. 

To ensure that people will change their behaviour, they will need to learn how to adapt to new behaviours through training. 
People will not be able to invest in this, if the new behaviours are not adequately rewarded (for example, focused placed on publications written instead of open data/software).
Short term goals can give people a sense of achievement and encourage them to move forward.  

(er-activism-cultural-change-leading)=
## Leading change

According to John P Kotter ({cite:ps}`Kotter2012change`) there are eight steps in change:
1.	Establishing a sense of urgency by identifying potential crises/opportunities.
2.	Creating the guiding coalition, a team that works together to lead the change.
3.	Developing a vision to direct the change and strategy to achieve this vision.
4.	Communicating the change vision using every communication channel possible, including role modelling.

> 5.	Empowering action by removing obstacles and encouraging risk taking.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5.	Empowering action by removing obstacles and encouraging risk-taking.
```

6.	Generating short-term wins and recognise people who made these wins possible.
7.	Consolidating change: maintain a sense of urgency, use situations to start a new wave of change, keep celebrating successes and evaluate/adjust if needed. 
8.	Anchoring new approaches in the culture.

The first four steps in the transformation process help to convince people or an organisation that they need to change. 
Phases five to seven introduce new practices. 
The last stage focusses on making these new practices stick. 

**Change is a team effort**

A single individual will not affect cultural change in an organisation, as this requires collective action.
A team with members in position of power, members with expertise or leadership skills and credibility, will be needed. 

**Vision for change**

The **vision** refers to the future and why people should strive to create that future. 
A vision clarifies the general direction for change and motivates people to take coordinated action. 
A vision will acknowledge that sacrifices will be needed to achieve benefits that would not be achievable without change. 

> An effective vision is imaginable (it conveys a picture of the future), desirable (appealing to anyone involved in the change), feasible (has attainable goals), focused (for clear decision making), and flexible (to allow for alternative responses in light of changing conditions).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An effective vision is imaginable (it conveys a picture of the future), desirable (appealing to anyone involved in the change), feasible (has attainable goals), focused (for clear decision-making), and flexible (to allow for alternative responses in light of changing conditions).
```

> This vision should be easy to communicate, in under five minutes. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This vision should be easy to communicate in under five minutes. 
```

> The effective communication of the vision depends on the simplicity of the message, whether appropriate metaphors or pictures are used, the communication channels used, how often the message is repeated and how the behaviour is modelled by important people. 

Reviewer: What does 'important' mean in this context? Is there anything additional that can be added here to identify what a 'person of influence' might look like?

Author: Added a suggested change which might clarify? 

_These important or influential people can have expertise on the topic the change is focusing on, a network which they can influence, or hold a higher hierarchical position in the institution which provides them with more power to achieve changes._

> The effective communication of the vision depends on the simplicity of the message, whether appropriate metaphors or pictures are used, the communication channels used, how often the message is repeated and how the behaviour is modelled by important people. 

Author: ```suggestion
The effective communication of the vision depends on the simplicity of the message, whether appropriate metaphors or pictures are used, the communication channels used, how often the message is repeated and how the behaviour is modelled by important people. 
These important or influential people can have expertise on the topic the change is focusing on, a network which they can influence, or hold a higher hierarchical position in the institution which provides them with more power to achieve changes.
```

(er-activism-cultural-change-summary)=
## Summary

Cultural change is a long-term effort that you can achieve by taking one step at a time, ideally with some like-minded individuals.
As it is difficult to achieve change without knowing where you're heading, it is good to outline a vision of what the change should look like. 

> To achieve change there will need to be transition. 

Reviewer: Just a suggestion for alternative drafting:
```suggestion
To achieve change, it is inevitable that a transition will occur.
```

Reviewer 2: Think it maybe reads better in the original!

Author: I think I might change this to : To achieve change, transitions are inevitable.

> To achieve change there will need to be transition. 

Author: ```suggestion
To achieve change, transitions are inevitable. 
```

> Transitions can be difficult to navigate for individuals, so patience and support are needed to safely fail in adjusting existing practices. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Transitions can be difficult to navigate for individuals, so patience and support are needed to safely fail, as they modify existing practices. 
```

Reviewer 2: Original may work better here too!

Author: Think so to, focus needs to be on individuals safety failing while they change their practices.

There are four P's in transitions ({cite:ps}`Bridges2017transitions`): 
- Purpose: people have to understand the logic behind the outcome and feel that the change is necessary.
- Picture: people need to experience how the outcome will look and feel.
- Plan: people need a step-by-step plan to know what they have to do.
- Part to play: especially if people have something to loose, they need to be able to play a part in the transition phase and eventual outcome.

To manage transitions it needs to be clear what the problem (reason for change) is. 
People will not change if they are not experiencing the problem and are convinced something needs to be adjusted. 
Those experiencing the problem will also have expertise and knowledge to come up with an effective solution. 
Individuals will stand to lose something when change is happening - a sense of control over this transition helps to make the transition more comfortable. 
It is important to learn what problems people are facing in a transition phase, and recognise individuals that do contribute to the change. 
People will need to feel safe to experiment and take risks, and not be punished when these experiments fail.

> It is important that changes are meaningfully clustered, or held off until they can be, to avoid a messy change pile. 

Author: ```suggestion
It is important that changes are meaningfully clustered, or held off until they can be, to avoid a messy change pile: 
```
